#Josh Rosen's Objective-C Style and Usage Guide

This is an evolving document for my personal style and usage guidelines when writing Objective-C code.  
  
Where possible, these guidelines are derived from the notion that code must be read many times, but written only once, and so places an emphasis on clarity and explicitness over terseness.  


##Abbreviations
Use of non-ubiquitous acronyms, initialisms, and truncations should be avoided. Widely adopted abbreviations such as HTML are acceptable. When a new engineer is joining a project, they should not have to wade through a sea of unfamiliar terminology (while in practice this unavoidable, it should be minimized).

##Opening Braces and Newlines
__C functions:__ Opening brace goes on a new line.
__Class and instance methods:__ Opening brace goes on a new line.
__If statement:__ Opening brace goes on a new line.
__C-Blocks:__ Opening brace goes on a new line, except when the block is a parameter for a C function or ObjC message send... Xcode will auto-format improperly otherwise.

	if (true)  
	{}  
	else  
	{}  

	[someObject doSomethingWithABlock:^(int someInt) {  
	            printf(“I’m in a block.”);  
	     }];  

	void (^aBlock)(int) = ^(int someInt)  
	{  
	   printf(“I’m in a block.”);  
	}
  
##Commenting
While comments are highly encouraged for documenting details and reasonings that are not obvious from the code itself, comments should never be considered a replacement for clear code. Before adding a comment, ask yourself if the code itself could be clarified, removing the need for the comment altogether.

	int nEntsW; // Number of entities in the world

	int numberOfEntitiesInTheWorld;


##Tabs or spaces?
Xcode defaults to 4 spaces, so to increase the likelihood of consistency, use 4 spaces.


##Identifier Naming

__Stack variables__ are named using camel-case-first-lower, and should form a noun.
int someVariable = 0;

The asterisk used for pointer declarations should immediately follow their base type, and should not be prefixed to the variable identifier.
NSString* someHtmlString;

*NOTE: The reasoning behind this is that "being a pointer" is a characteristic of the type, not a characteristic of the identifier. Prefixing the asterisk on the identifier is necessary when using C's "int *x, *y, *z;" syntax, but this syntax should not be used; see "Declare variables nearest to first use".*

__C functions__ are named using camel-cased-first-lower, and should form a verb or action.  

	void doSomething(void)
	{
	}

When associated with a particular class, C functions should be prefixed with that class’s identifier and placed inside that class’s @implementation block.

	Dog_bark(Dog* self)
	{
	}
  
*NOTE: It’s important to place class-associated C functions inside their corresponding class’s @implementation block so that they can directly access private instance variables.*  
  
  
_Classes, structs, and protocols_ are named using camel-case-first-upper.  
  
	@interface HTMLParser : Parser <SomeProtocol>  
  
Subclasses should express their added characteristics with prefixed, not suffixed, qualifiers.  

	GreenBox : Box // preferred
	Box_Green : Box // avoid
 
*NOTE: Initialisms, like HTML, are formatted as "HTML" for class names, but formatted as "Html" for all other identifiers. While it is arguable that each letter in an initialism represents a separate word, and thus should each start with a capital letter, it can be difficult to read where camel-cased words start and end in this situation. E.g., quickly reading the separation between "HTML" and "String" is difficult in someHTMLString. However, Apple has established a strong precedent for using all-uppercase initialisms in class names, so we abide by this as an exception.*
  
  
_Instance variables_ are named similarly to stack variables, camel-cased-first-lower.  
  
	@interface SomeClass : NSObject  
	{  
	 int foo;  
	}  
	@end  

*NOTE: Explicitly declaring instance variables is rarely needed anymore, as property synthesis now generate implied instance variables.*

When referring to an instance variable, it’s recommended to use include the explicit self-> prefix so as to differentiate from property dot access.

Properties should share the precise name of  their instance variable counterpart. Properties should be given the nonatomic attribute for performance reasons, unless otherwise needed.

	@property (nonatomic, assign) int foo;

__Instance methods__ and class methods should be named using camel-cased-first-lower, with a newline added after every parameter that isn’t the last, and should have a verb/action form. Parameters should also be named using camel-cased-first-lower.

	- (void)readFromFilepath:(NSString*)filepath;
	
	- (void)readFromFilepath:(NSString*)filepath
	                             error:(NSError**)errorOrNil;

Method parameters may be lengthened to clarify their usage (e.g. errorOrNil).
Methods should most often be named in verb form, with the exception of methods which act as property accessors.

Method name components should always indicate their inputs, not just their basic action.  

	- (void)readFromFilepath:(NSString*)filepath; // preferred
	- (void)read:(NSString*)filepath;  // avoid
  

__Enums__ should be named camel-cased-first-upper. Each value of an enum should be named with the full length of the enum’s name, appended by the value’s name.

	typedef enum
	{
		ResultAllGood,
		ResultUnexpectedError,
		ResultUnknown
	} Result;


__IBOutlets__ should be named to represent the object that will present data, not the data itself.  
	@property (nonatomic, retain) UILabel* titleLabel;   // preferred
	@property (nonatomic, retain) UILabel* title; // misleading

Never mark instance variables as IBOutlets directly. Retain rules for IBOutlet instance variables differ depending on platform and can lead to memory leaks.


__IBActions__ are methods, and thus should maintain their verb-based form.
  
	- (IBAction)showDetails;  // preferred
	- (IBAction)showDetailsAction;  // loses verb form
	- (IBAction)button1Action;  // don’t do this :)

__Block variables__ should be named similarly to other variables, perhaps with a “Handler” or “Block” suffix, but still maintaining a noun form.

	void (^doSomethingBlock)(int) = ^(int someInput)   // preferred
	{
	}
	
	void (^doSomething)(int) = ^(int someInput)   // avoid
	{
	}

__Defines for code switching__ should be named in all-caps, with underscores separating each word.
	#define ENABLE_PRINTING 1

	#if ENABLE_PRINTING
	printf(“foo”);
	#endif

__Defines for value constants__ should be named camel-cased, with a prefixed “k”.
  
	#define kMagickNumber 5.123
	
	float x = kMagickNumber _* y;

__Defines for code generation__ should be named camel-cased-first-upper.
  
	#define CustomAssert(case, message) if (!case) { printf(“assert: %s\n” message); assert(false);}


##Class Categories
Categories can provide a convenient way to add functionality to an existing class, especially clasess whose implementation you cannot control.
Methods added to a class via a category should maintain the same naming conventions as other methods, no uniquifying prefixes should not be added. However, it’s important to note that if multiple categories override the same method, one of the categories will silently override the other. Thus, it’s important to keep the method names in categories as explicit as possible, to avoid differing implementations to conflict.

##Private Class Extension Categories
Extension categories should be used to add method, property, and instance declarations that are private to your class’s implementation.

	@interface MyClass : NSObject
	- (void)publicMethod;
	@end
	
	@interface MyClass ()
	{
	int privateInstanceVariable;
	}
	@property (nonatomic, retain) int privateProperty;
	- (void)privateMethod;
	end


##Use structured types to represent structured data. Minimize usage of loosely defined dictionaries to transfer otherwise well defined data.
For example, if a server request that is expected to contain data in the following format,

	{“name”: “Joe”, “phone”: “123-123-1234”}
an Objective-C class should be created with *name* and *phoneNumberString* properties. This class should be used whenever the response data is passed throughout the program. Do not pass around a dictionary containing “name” and “phone” keys through the program’s internals. If the server’s response is later updated to change the “name” key to “fullName”, refactoring the client code to handle this change will be safer if there is a compiler-checked representation of the data.

	@interface User : NSObject
	@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString* name;
	@property (nonatomic, retain) NSString* phoneNumberString;
	@end


##Never rely on the timing of a dealloc method’s exection. Never place any business logic in dealloc methods, only release and free memory.
It’s very important to not make assumptions about when a dealloc method will be called. Even if you define strict rules for which objects can retain you (which you shouldn’t), as soon as your object is added to an autorelease pool, your object’s dealloc will be postponed.
Thus, you should minimize, if not eliminate, any business logic inside a dealloc method; if said business logic makes assumptions about a program’s state at time of execution, difficult to reproduce inconsistencies and bugs may arise.
  
##Do not use property accessors in dealloc methods.
Related to the above topic, using property accessors in a dealloc method may cause KVO events to fire, which is likely to cause other objects to interact with your object while it is partially deallocated.


##Do not use property accessors in init methods.
Using property accessors in init methods may cause KVO events  to fire, which is likely to cause other objects to interact with your object before it is fully initialized.

##Use class-associated C functions instead of methods when extra performance is needed.
When working with performance critical code (which isn’t all code), it’s often a good idea to forgo the cleanliness of Objective-C message sends in place of class-associated C functions. As long as your method doesn’t expect to be overridden by a subclass, it’s usually acceptable to use a C function instead. Doing so will save a message send per call, which is expected to be more costly than a C function call.


##When to use message-send dot syntax vs. bracket syntax.
A method does not have be associated with a property in order to use message send dot syntax.
UIColor.redColor uses the same mechanics as someTextField.text.
Generally, it’s acceptable to use dot syntax whenever the method you are calling forms a noun. Conversely, a method that forms a verb should not be used with dot syntax, e.g. dog.bark.


##Utilizing Objective-C blocks (aka lamdas, closures)
Blocks utilize a syntax that is often unfamiliar, and can lead to a complex, if not confusing, code flow if not used carefully. That said, blocks can also be extremely useful for expressing complex asynchronous event chains in a way that is naturally close to the problem.

An example borrowed from ["Designing With Blocks", Ben Coe](http://www.benjamincoe.com/post/15891802388/objective-c-designing-with-blocks):

	IMAP* imap = [[IMAP alloc] init];
	[imap connect: @"imap.gmail.com" port: 993 callback: ^(bool connected, NSError *error){
	  [imap login: @"fakeuser@gmail.com" password: @"fakepass" callback: ^(NSString* response){
	      [imap select: @"[Gmail]/All Mail" callback: ^(NSString* response){
	          [imap fetch: @"200" fields: @"(body[header.fields (from to subject date)])" callback: ^(NSString* message){
	              NSLog(@"%@", message);
	          }];
	      }];
	  }];
	}];

Here, a rather complex chain of asynchronous events can concisely expressed without the need for a tedious set of callback methods.


##Declare variables nearest to first use.
This avoids uninitialized variables existing in scope longer than necessary, which might otherwise lead to accidental use of uninitialized values.

	void doSomething(void)
	{
	   int z = getSomethingFromServer();   // preferred
	   int x = getSomethingElse() + 20;
	   int y = x + z;
	}
	
	void doSomething(void)
	{
	   int x, y;  // avoid
	   bool z;
	
	   z = getSomethingFromServer();
	   x = getSomethingElse() + 20;
	   y = x + z;
	}